Human Geography & Cloud Computing 
Project By: Daniel Tracy 
Czech University of Life Sciences Prague 2022

In recent years, human populations have grown to enormous proportions. There are concentrated areas such as cities, ports and other populated areas which contain resource access. While other areas are barren of humans, or resources for that matter, it may not always have been that way in particular areas. Perhaps a chaotic volcano such as on La Palma, could create a natural disaster for inhabitants in the way of molten lava flowing to the sea off the island. Others such as wildfires can bring hunters to that same forest foraging for the edible Morel fungus, known to remediate soil after a forest fire. There are many events in history that show how mass migrations occurred due to resource allocation, natural disasters, access to water, and nomads discovering inhabitable frontier landscapes. Geography of humans has consistently morphed throughout our history, often following the flow of food or water. As an ultimately adaptable species, we still demonstrate our livelihood at the mercy of nature. In recent years, the threshold of drought and temperature rising has its grip on many places around the globe. Focusing on one of the larger fires of 2020 to demonstrate an example, we observe the Creek Fire in California. California has reported some of the largest wildfires recorded, which abruptly begin due to dire circumstances of the land. With ongoing drought and being stricken with exploited water resources, this place has seen the worst yet to come. 
The Creek fire in California was classified as a giga fire, due to the vast size of the event. This colossal fire started on 4th of September, 2020(1). Many people and animals were displaced, as 856 buildings were destroyed in the fire.Creek fire burned more land than any other recorded single fire, up to 379,895 Acres(Incident Information System,2020.”Creek Fire Maps”, URL:https://inciweb.nwcg.gov/incident/maps/7147/​ Lightning was most likely the cause of the blaze’s eruption in the dry conifer forests. There were high winds whipping up in the week which fueled the fires to blaze onward and upward into the mountainous terrain and the stratosphere. The smoky ash reached altitudes of 15240+ meters into the atmosphere as the Pyrocumulonimbus cloud formed over the event(1). The atrocity was felt even in Europe, with air parcels carrying microparticles across the planet. Within days the dispersal of toxic particles was evident. As we see in the images, the vastness of the Creek Fire, there is much more to be concerned about. Air pollutants released include fine particulate matter such as black carbon, brown carbon, along with trace gasses nitrous oxide, ozone, and sulfur dioxide affect not only planetary health, but also all humans(2). Burning for over three months, this long duration input of volatile fumes and pm 2.5 wreaked havoc on our planet. The aspect of human geography in regards to fires of this magnitude, will likely be influenced significantly as we move forward. The role these fires are to play in the global arena, have pronounced effects already. 
Our terrestrial planet which we inhabit has seen so much destruction that we are finding technologies to explore inhabiting other planets, such as Mars. The billions of funds poured into rocket technology and space survival have demonstrated how humans have become resigned about the possible irreversibility of the damages caused by our carbon footprint as a species. Undeniably fear invoking, we can see that our air pollution issues are raising the temperature of the planet, inevitably increasing risks for further destruction by forest fires. The geography of humans shifts as we embrace the change, often forced to for survival. 


Figure1 demonstrates the parcel of air and how fast the dispersal was distributed abroad within 9 days of ignition.

Noxious health risks in the emissions are hazardous to respiratory and circulatory systems, along with pregnancy hazards. Aerosols from wildfires releasing emissions with pm 2.5 are known to increase mortality and birth defects(3). Anyone with asthma has a particularly problematic response to the conditions created by these massive wildfires. The fire’s toll was not only local, as the air pollutants were spread across the North American continent over the Labrador Sea, and over North Atlantic Ocean to the neighboring continent Europe. As seen in the Hysat report in Figure1, the parcels traveled to high elevation then scattered over the horizons of many inhabited places. Air parcels move vastly across our planet and contributions of trace gasses such as oxide, sulfur dioxide, carbon dioxide, monoxide, and nitrous oxide, are hazardous for the atmosphere.

Figure2 is an Air Quality report in the area of the fire(200-300 Air Quality Index is considered dangerous). The observation ​near California’s largest single wildfire in the Mammoth Lakes area was recorded at severely toxic levels of hazardous particulate matter(2.5) peaking at 578​μg per m³(6)
Air pollution is causing more wildfires annually which are not only a risk to human kind  and environments local to catastrophes, but also swiftly affects the rest of the planet by dispersal of horrendous toxins. Drought, caused by climate change which is exacerbated by air pollution, creates perpetual increase in wildfires globally(4). Micro-scale solutions will include land restoration projects and policy reform for decreasing the rate of change for the mean temperature of Earth. Macro scale solutions will include all other nations globally to administer enhanced ecological laws, and innovation of industry for more biological symbiosis. The future holds quite a large mystery as for where humans will inhabit when rising seas and inferno become more common. Record temperatures of 54°C were recorded prior to the fire. Global temperature increase has caused a 74% increase in world wildfires in 2020​(5)

To better demonstrate the fire’s vast coverage, several technologies were used. Remote sensing was used with Qgis software for satellite images of the catastrophe from Copernicus Open Access Hub, using Sentinel-2 images. Image enhancement procedure was completed on ArcGIS software Arcmap, to improve clarity of Qgis images. Measurements of the amount of area burned found on Incident Information System website(Incident Information System, 2020. Creek Fire California Incident, URL:https://inciweb.nwcg.gov ,(Accessed 26.12.2021)). Air quality index of historical data was found using the website for World Air Quality Index(World Air Quality Index Monitoring, 2020. Mammoth Lakes Region California Historical Data, ​https://waqi.info(Accessed 30.12.2021)). The Earth Observing System Data and Information System provided time-lapsed imagery of the earth using satellite imagery in the interactive EOSDIS site​. Using the Earth Engine by Google has provided results more rapidly. E.E. was the most time effective method of producing results using cloud computing. Cloud computation of the normalized difference was rapid to script and running was quick for results to appear. Less software required and accessibility anywhere with internet connection, proving elite for analysis. The other options required retrieving data, preprocessing the satellite images, and processing further to properly demonstrate the scorched areas. I used ArcGIS to visualize the burned area after the fires. Tragedy can easily be mapped using the Delta Normalized Vegetation Index to show the difference from before and after. Plants reflect infrared light, so measuring vegetation is simple using the satellite images. Using this remote sensing technology, we are taking the difference of the infrared light from the surface of burned areas prior to fires, and the aftermath images of infrared light. The difference will demonstrate the size and impact of the fires. The results were more clear using commercial paid product ArcGIS, and open-source Qgis softwares. However, using the Google Earth Engine proved fastest for results. With some adjustments to the code in E.E., the images were able to be used for demonstration. The process of data collection, download, and preprocessing required for both ArcGIS and Qgis were extensive. While the results for Google Earth Engine proved that cloud computing was far more time efficient. 
Link to Earth Engine code: https://code.earthengine.google.com/b3e52e9246e9a7cdec0c648ca18c7351


Figure3 shows the Pyrocumulonimbus cloud towering into the ethers of our stratosphere within 24hours of ignition, timelapse gathered from Nasa Worldview 
Figure4 Pyrocumulonimbus cloud formation within first day of ignition
Figure5 demonstrates altitudes reached by Pyrocumulonimbus cloud
Figure6 is the first day of the fire, notice how many more fires are active(orange)((4.09.2020))
Figure7 beginning of the fire and the smoke plumes becoming evident.(5.09.2020)
Figure8 shows how the magnitude of the Creek grew immensely and covered the Pacific coastal regions. (10.09.2020)
Figure9 shows the entire West coast covered in pollutants within a week of ignition and the distribution flowing westbound and eastbound.(11.09.2020)
Figure10 demonstrates after 8 days of ignition, the parcel reaches Europe(12.09.2020)
Figure11 demonstrates how the continent of North America quickly became toxic for its inhabitants due to this tragedy. (13.09.2020)
Figure12 Earth Engine showing black for burned areas , green for vegetation still intact
Figure13 Qgis Before NDVI
Figure14 Qgis ∆NDVI demonstrating how barren the land became after the fires
Figure15 Arcgis processed shows more defined burn area using NBR


In conclusion, our species will continue adapting to nature’s course. 
There will be cities that inevitably become submerged in the ocean and deserts that flourish one day with orchards of fruit. 
There will continuously be mass migration and a constant exchange of geolocation following resources and inhabitability. 
The future is unclear, but the changes are to be expected, as well as continuous accumulation of anthropogenic impacts and diverse effects. 
While we develop more technology and better understanding, perhaps in our lifetime we will see the redistribution of many people on each of the continents. 
Humans have many very important values to assess in the coming eras and future generations depend on this.




References


Lynn Jenner(2020)”California’s Creek fire creates its own Pyrocmulonimbus cloud”. nasa.gov
Bärbel​ ​Langmann,Bryan​ ​Duncan, Christiane Textor, Jörg Trentmann, Guido R. van der Werf(2009) “Vegetation fire emissions and their impact on air pollution and climate”.​Volume 43​, Pages 107-116.
New Zealand Ministry of Health(2 014)”Response to Major Fires: Guidelines for Public Health Units – revised edition 2014”. Wellington: Ministry of Health
Rongbin Xu, Pei Yu, Michael J. Abramson, Fay H. Johnston, Jonathan M. Samet, Michelle L. Bell, Andy Haines, Kristie L. Ebi, Shanshan Li, Yuming Guo(2020)”​Wildfires, Global Climate Change, and Human Health”. New England Journal of medicine. 383:2173-2181
Philip E. Higuera​, ​John T. Abatzoglou​(2020)”​Record-setting climate enabled the extraordinary 2020 fire season in the western United States”.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/full/10.1111/gcb.15388
(2020)​https://aqicn.org/city/california/mono/mammoth-lakes-gateway-hc/

